---
title: "14.0 表現可能関手"
---

原文：[4. Representable Functors ](https://bartoszmilewski.com/2015/07/29/representable-functors/)

\lettrine[lhang=0.17]{I}{t's about time} we had a little talk about sets.
Mathematicians have a love/hate relationship with set theory. It's the
assembly language of mathematics --- at least it used to be. Category
theory tries to step away from set theory, to some extent. For instance,
it's a known fact that the set of all sets doesn't exist, but the category
of all sets, $\Set$, does. So that's good. On the other hand, we assume that
morphisms between any two objects in a category form a set. We even
called it a hom-set. To be fair, there is a branch of category theory
where morphisms don't form sets. Instead they are objects in another
category. Those categories that use hom-objects rather than hom-sets,
are called \newterm{enriched} categories. In what follows, though, we'll
stick to categories with good old-fashioned hom-sets.

A set is the closest thing to a featureless blob you can get outside of
categorical objects. A set has elements, but you can't say much about
these elements. If you have a finite set, you can count the elements.
You can kind of count the elements of an infinite set using cardinal
numbers. The set of natural numbers, for instance, is smaller than the
set of real numbers, even though both are infinite. But, maybe
surprisingly, a set of rational numbers is the same size as the set of
natural numbers.

Other than that, all the information about sets can be encoded in
functions between them --- especially the invertible ones called
isomorphisms. For all intents and purposes isomorphic sets are
identical. Before I summon the wrath of foundational mathematicians, let
me explain that the distinction between equality and isomorphism is of
fundamental importance. In fact it is one of the main concerns of the
latest branch of mathematics, the Homotopy Type Theory (HoTT). I'm
mentioning HoTT because it's a pure mathematical theory that takes
inspiration from computation, and one of its main proponents, Vladimir
Voevodsky, had a major epiphany while studying the Coq theorem prover.
The interaction between mathematics and programming goes both ways.

The important lesson about sets is that it's okay to compare sets of
unlike elements. For instance, we can say that a given set of natural
transformations is isomorphic to some set of morphisms, because a set is
just a set. Isomorphism in this case just means that for every natural
transformation from one set there is a unique morphism from the other
set and vice versa. They can be paired against each other. You can't
compare apples with oranges, if they are objects from different
categories, but you can compare sets of apples against sets of oranges.
Often transforming a categorical problem into a set-theoretical problem
gives us the necessary insight or even lets us prove valuable theorems.


（和訳：[@ashiato45](https://twitter.com/ashiato45)）
